# Overview
Airplane bird strikes, also known as bird-aircraft collisions, represent a significant safety concern for aircraft around the world. According to the US Fish and Wildlife Service, bird and other wildlife strikes are estimated to cause almost $1 billion of damage to aircraft annually. Additionally, bird strikes can cause safety hazards for pilots and passengers if the strike causes enough damage to the aircraft to cause an accident. A famous example is the 2009 US Airways Flight 1549 that struck a flock of geese and lost all engine power resulting in an emergency landing on the Hudson River in New York. 
 In an effort to better understand the patterns and different factors that contribute to airplane bird strikes, aviation authorities and organizations around the world have collected large amounts of data. Analysis of this data helps the Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) better understand the scope of the problem and if there are any patterns that could direct management programs, including:
Habitat management
Wildlife dispersal, removal, and exclusion
Prediction or detection of wildlife movements and behavior, so pilots can avoid activities that would increase likelihood of bird strike
Management programs in turn benefit airlines by reducing costs associated with damage to aircraft, flight delays, or cancellations following a bird strike. The programs benefit wildlife by putting measures in place to work to decrease the number of bird strikes that occur. And lastly the common person benefits from making air travel safer as a result of fewer bird/wildlife strikes.

# Data Analyzed
The dataset I have chosen comprises over 25,000 reports filed by airlines documenting birds strikes and associated information, including information such as the date, airport, aircraft make/model, altitude, number of birds struck, size of birds struck, impact to the flight and whether there was any damage to the aircraft. 
From this information, I wanted to focus most on whether there was damage to the aircraft, as this would be the most significant point of interest to airlines and aviation authorities. From looking at the data, there were many factors that may have influenced whether there was damage to the aircraft resulting from the bird strike, but I wanted to focus primarily on the number of birds struck and the altitude of the aircraft, as I felt these would provide the most information on what characteristics could indicate types of birds that were more likely to cause damage to the aircraft (which would be valuable information for wildlife management efforts) and whether there were particular altitudes where strikes were more likely to occur (which would be valuable information for pilots to increase awareness at those altitudes).

# Research Questions and Hypothesis
Based on the data that I wanted to focus on, I formulated two research questions: 
1) Is there a correlation between the number of birds struck and whether there was damage to the aircraft?
2) Is there a difference in the altitude that bird strikes occured and whether there was damage to the aircraft?
My hypothesis for my first question is that there will be a difference between the number of birds struck and whether there was damage to the aircraft. Due to the fact that birds that fly in large flocks are smaller size birds on average, and I believe would be less likely to cause damage to the aircraft in large numbers compared to smaller flocks or solo birds, which tend to be larger birds that are more likely to cause damage due to their size.
My hypothesis for the second question is that there will not be a difference between the altitude where the strike occurred and whether there was damage to the aircraft. I would anticipate that more strikes would occur at lower altitudes due to limitations on the average height of most bird flight, but I think that the size of the bird would have the most influence on whether there was damage to the aircraft, regardless of the altitude the aircraft is at at the time of the strike.

# Statistical Results: Question I
For the first question (Is there a correlation between the number of birds struck and whether there was damage to the aircraft?), I split the data into two groups based on whether or not there was damage to the aircraft and then graphed the number of reports for each number of birds struck. The graph showed an overwhelming skew to the lower end of the range (meaning fewer number of birds struck). 
To get a better idea of the range I was looking at, I made a table with the number of birds struck broken into ranges and the number of reports within each range. From this information we can confirm that the vast majority of bird strikes involve 1-10 birds, with more than 70% of strikes involving only one bird, and less than 3% of strikes involving more than 10 birds. 
Statistical analysis showed that there was no significant difference between the distribution of the two groups (Yes Damage and No Damage), indicating that there is likely no correlation between the number of birds struck and whether there was damage to the aircraft. This is contrary to my initial hypothesis. 

# Discussion and Considerations: Question I 
Based on the size of the two groups, we saw that only about 1 in 10 bird strikes result in damage to the aircraft. The results of the test indicated that there is no significant difference between the number of birds struck and whether damage was caused, so we can infer that damage to the aircraft is about 10% possible regardless of the number of birds struck. 
Considering other variables, it would be interesting to look into whether the size of the wildlife struck was related to whether damage was caused, since the majority of the bird strikes were single birds, and small birds may be less likely to cause damage. 
If new data could be collected in this domain, I would add a column for the location of the bird strike on the plane, as I imagine it would be more likely for there to be damage to the aircraft in certain locations (ex: if a bird was ingested into an engine or impacted the aircraft nose directly). 

# Statistical Results: Question 2
For the second question (Is there a difference in the altitude that bird strikes occured and whether there was damage to the aircraft?), I split the data into two groups based on whether or not there was damage to the aircraft, filtered out any reports that did not include altitude data, and then graphed the number of reports for each altitude where a bird strike occurred. The graph showed an overwhelming skew to the lower end of the range (meaning the aircraft was lower to the ground when the strike occurred). 
To get a better idea of what is going on at the lower end of the graph, I made a table of the top 5 most common altitudes that bird strikes occurred at for each group (Damage and No Damage). From this we can see that the large majority of bird strikes occurred at altitude 0, meaning when the aircraft is still on the ground, and when calculated this represented 39% of the total bird strike reports. Following this, the next most common altitudes were spread across a range of 2000 ft or less, which would most likely be during the climbing phase of takeoff, or the final descent of landing, which makes sense as the majority of birds 
Statistical analysis showed that there was no significant difference between the distribution of the two groups (Yes Damage and No Damage), indicating that there is likely no correlation between the altitude that the bird strike occurred at and whether there was damage to the aircraft. This aligns with my initial hypothesis. 

# Discussion and Considerations
As was mentioned previously, we can see that only about 1 in 10 bird strikes result in damage to the aircraft, and the majority of these occurred at low altitudes, while the aircraft was still on the ground or during takeoff/landing. 
The results of the above test indicate that there is no significant difference between the altitude that the strike occurred at and whether there was damage to the aircraft, so my initial hypothesis was correct. From this we can infer that there is about a 10% possibility of a bird strike causing damage to an aircraft regardless of the altitude that the strike occurred at. 
Based on the results of the above two tests, I would be interested to explore whether there was a correlation between high and low altitude (above or below 500ft) and the number of birds struck or the size of the bird struck. 
Since the majority of birds typically fly below 500 ft except during migration, it would be interesting to get more information regarding what types of birds are more likely to be struck at these different altitudes, which could help to direct specific wildlife management efforts. 
Additionally, it would be interesting to look at the correlation between altitude and time of year to see if there is a difference in the number of bird strikes at different heights during peak migration seasons.

